
=== North Star Architecture Strategy 2024 ===
Source: Local PDF File
Pages: 23
Words: 9990
Links Found: 175

Page 1:
INTERNAL – SAP Only
North Star Architecture  
Strategy 2024
Based on the Visions and Strategies of the  
Cross-Product Architecture Working Groups

Page 2:
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
Table  
of contents
1 Introduction 
2 User Experience
4 Business Application Development
6 Data Management
8 Artificial Intelligence
10 Integration
12 Business Technology Platform
15 Global Availability and  
Rollout Strategy
17 Authentication, Authorization, and 
Identity Lifecycle Management
19 Cloud Delivery and Operations
21 A Final Word
Authors
Ralf Hofmann, Thomas Janke,  
Priyanka Porwal, Frank Samuel
Contributors
Jan Dumke, Karsten Hohage,  
Matthias Rosker, Axel Schröder,  
Florian Winkler, Jeff Wootton, 
Alexander Zubev
2024-01-30 © 2024 SAP SE or an SAP affiliate company.  
All rights reserved. See Legal Notice on  
www.sap.com/legal-notice for use terms, disclaimers, 
disclosures, or restrictions related to this material.
CROSS-PRODUCT
ARCHITECTURE
CROSS-PRODUCT
ARCHITECTURE

Page 3:
1 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
The principles, guardrails, and best practices 
described here apply to applications and services 
across SAP. For dedicated use cases, certain 
exceptions are acceptable, but require good rea -
soning and a conscious decision from the respon -
sible engineering teams. The teams concerned 
need to both be aware of the long-term conse -
quences and accept the implications regarding 
any future evolution, roadmap investments, and 
daily operations. 
This North Star Architecture document is based on 
the 2023 SAP strategy paper and complements 
and updates previous North Star Architecture doc-
uments. Its content is based on the alignment work 
of the Cross-Product Architecture  (CPA) working 
groups.
The CPA collaboration model was established in 
2021 to ensure that technology development is 
well aligned between technology consumers, pri -
marily our lines of business (LoBs) and technology 
providers, which are typically teams within the 
Business Technology Platform (BTP) and some -
times service providers from other organizations. 
CPA focuses on improving integration between 
SAP services and standardizing SAP technology 
components where appropriate. The North Star 
Architecture became an integral part of CPA, as it 
provides inputs and guardrails that are then 
detailed out by the various CPA working groups. 
This document also considers the strategic direc -
tion from the Cloud Delivery Architecture  (CDA) 
group, which was created in 2023 to drive cloud 
delivery efficiency along the three dimensions of 
“Cloud Delivery Financial Operations”, “Cloud 
Delivery Process and Tools Efficiency” and “Cloud 
Delivery Architecture Optimization”. In addition, 
this document puts emphasis on achieving various 
cloud qualities and reducing total cost of opera -
tions (TCO) of our cloud services. The document is 
not meant to replace the Product Standards , CPA 
working group documents , or requirements from 
the Technology Guidelines (TGs).
This North Star Architecture document does not 
provide detailed coverage of all aspects of soft -
ware architecture. It focuses on the architecture 
topics that are most relevant and impactful for 
SAP in the near and mid-term future. In addition, 
certain important cross-cutting aspects are not 
discussed in dedicated chapters in this document 
but are addressed across multiple chapters. For 
instance, security is a core value for SAP and is 
integral to all our products. Therefore, the concept 
of "shift left," which involves incorporating security 
capabilities automatically and transparently 
through well-defined processes and tools (such as 
hardened images), is discussed in the “ Business 
Application Development” chapter as an example. 
Similarly, the topic of asset management is briefly 
mentioned in the “Cloud Delivery and Operations” 
section. The same approach has been taken for 
other crucial cross-cutting architectural aspects 
like reliability and resiliency.
In the following nine chapters, which are struc -
tured into overarching topic areas, this document 
describes SAP’s strategic direction.
The North Star Architecture document gives guidance for the most strategic 
architectural topics at SAP. It provides technical recommendations, engineering 
principles, architecture guardrails, and best practices for applications and 
services, addressing a time horizon of three to five years.
Introduction

Page 4:
2 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
Our goal is to enable all SAP products to contribute to a seamless 
user experience that provides value to our customers by being integrated, 
consistent, intuitive, insight-driven, and is implemented in a cost-efficient way. 
To realize this, we must deeply understand the 
user’s needs. Only then can we design and develop 
the right user experience that will excite customers 
and makes SAP attractive and competitive in the 
market. The user experience of our products must 
also become more tailored to role-based use cases 
and offer personalization for end user needs.
To deliver on this goal, all products must comply 
with the existing product standards, most promi -
nently Product Standard UX Consistency (UXC) and 
Product Standard Accessibility. Furthermore, devel-
opment teams need to consider the following strat-
egies and guidance:
 • ONE Design System: We must further harmonize 
application design while providing an inclusive, 
customer-first approach to designing and devel -
oping at SAP. The SAP Design System is SAP’s 
 unified design system. All web and mobile appli-
cations across our product portfolio must adopt 
these concepts and adhere to them to ease the 
overall implementation and foster out-of-the-box 
consistency (see enablement guide). Established 
design guidelines such as Fiori Design Guidelines 
for Web and BTP UX Toolkit are already built on 
cornerstones like UXC and are being consoli -
dated into a single SAP Design System Portal to 
provide guidance for components, patterns, floor-
plans and even CLI. To enhance and broaden our 
SAP Design System, we are transitioning to an 
InnerSource contribution model across all prod -
ucts managed by Core Design.
 • UI Component Strategy: To enhance UX consis-
tency across applications, we are further harmo -
nizing a growing list of technology agnostic 
 commonly used components. Accordingly, we are 
extending our UI Technology strategy by offering 
User Experience
SAP Web Components for general reuse across 
different UI technologies (e.g., SAPUI5, React, and 
Angular), improving developer efficiency and 
ensuring consistent enterprise qualities. Lastly, 
the creation and contribution of domain-specific 
web components will be further streamlined 
through the Hyperspace Paved Road for SAP 
Web Components.
 • User Insights: To measure success, product 
teams must collect user insights through a UI con-
text-aware Product Experience (PX) Integration 
(TG17 – User Insights ) by embedding standard -
ized Qualtrics surveys. Improvements can also be 
analyzed with the BTP UX Deep-Dive Dashboard 
(T&I) and the Voice of the User Dashboard (PE).
 • Mobile Experience and Mobile  Technologies: 
Mobile applications must be built with SAP Mobile 
Technologies (e.g., SDK, MDK) using Mobile ser -
vices ( TG44 – Mobile Technologies ). With these 
technologies, SAP, customers, and partners can 
find clear guidance on how to rapidly build enter-
prise-grade mobile solutions. Mobile applications 
must also follow SAP’s mobile design guidelines.
 • Digital Assistant (Joule): For the conversational 
experience SAP’s Digital Assistant (Joule) must 
be embedded throughout SAP’s cloud portfolio, 
delivering contextualized insights. AI UX guidance 
is constantly growing as we learn and iterate. 
We are building an integrated platform experi -
ence fueled by SAP Kernel Services  to provide 
consistent access to the same functionality across 
all SAP products, following platform experience 
design guidelines. Every product must integrate 
with these services to enable a common set of UX-
related capabilities.

Page 5:
3 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
User Experience
Our end users often rely on various products and 
applications during the execution of their business 
processes. To ensure the best possible support for 
our users, all products for business users must inte-
grate with SAP’s central entry points  ( TG01 – 
 Central Entry Point and Cross Product Navigation), 
i.e., SAP Start or SAP Build Work Zone editions. 
These provide simple and intuitive access to appli-
cations, tasks, processes, and information across 
all SAP products through one underlying common 
platform. To enable central entry points, products 
must integrate with kernel services like SAP Build 
Work Zone foundation:
 • Deep Linking: Deep linking capabilities enable 
cross-product navigation. Products must support 
deep linking (TG01.R1 – Support Deep Linking) to 
allow direct navigation from central entry points 
or product entry points.
 • Content Integration: Products must evolve to 
become content providers ( TG01.R2 – Integrate 
with Central Entry Point) by utilizing the Common 
Data Model Replication API to allow for content 
aggregation in business users’ central entry 
points. Essential integration content like business 
applications and deep links are shared via the 
Work Zone platform while assuring a product’s 
technical autonomy.
 • Interest Cards: Integrating with the Interest Card 
Service ( TG01.R4  – Integrate with Interest Card 
Service) allows SAP business solutions to provide 
consistent, up-to-date information to their busi -
ness users through SAP’s central entry point 
solutions.
 • Tasks: Kernel service SAP Task Center ( TG13 – 
One Inbox) provides a single task inbox for web 
and mobile that enables customers to process 
tasks in a streamlined manner.
 • Notifications: Integrating with Notifications  Kernel 
Service allows products to make users aware about 
situations that require timely action or attention. 
Notifications are delivered over various channels – 
web app, mobile, email, messaging apps, etc. 
To stay competitive and optimize R&D costs, SAP 
constantly enhances its UX platform capabilities. 
Further steps in that direction include the harmo -
nization of user settings, standardizing themes, 
and centralizing navigation.
In addition to enhancing the business user experi -
ence, we put high emphasis on optimizing the user 
experience for administrators and developers:
The journey for administrators begins with their first 
interaction as potential customers. We’re refining 
the user experience from the moment customers 
initiate their first SAP solution rollout, including trial 
or freemium offerings, up to the complete lifecycle- 
and landscape management for all their SAP solu -
tions. We envision a SaaS user experience that 
empowers customers to focus on their businesses 
rather than on IT infrastructure management. 
Through holistic landscape management, we intend 
to help customers maximize the value of their SAP 
solution. Customers will be able to manage all their 
SAP solutions as part of their entire IT landscape, 
whether they prefer an interactive user interface, a 
command line interface, or automation tooling for 
this purpose. More insights about our technical 
approach can be found in the chapters on 
 Integration and Business Technology Platform.
Transitioning to developers, we understand that UX 
transcends beyond graphical user interfaces and 
covers the entire interaction framework. To fuel 
innovation and evolution in solutions, it is impera -
tive to provide a consistent and harmonized API 
ecosystem around our products. This requires a 
deeper exploration beyond fundamental API pat -
terns and general concepts for our APIs across all 
SAP solutions (TG03 – Aligned Business APIs). We 
must design these APIs with both a service provider 
mindset and a focus on our consumers’ use cases. 
We’re further witnessing a change from command-
based interaction to intent-based outcome specifi-
cations. The interface design needs to empower 
developers to state their outcome (conversational/
prompts) rather than navigate complex options.

Page 6:
4 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
While we are committed to providing an open, extensible, and heterogeneous 
ecosystem of tools and services to internal and external developers, we need to 
improve developer efficiency through harmonization, consolidation, and more 
guidance. 
A major cornerstone of SAP’s success was the abil-
ity to provide a coherent development platform 
for building business applications in a highly cost 
and time-efficient way. Business application devel-
opers were able to focus solely on solving busi -
ness-related problems by writing business logic 
rather than being sidetracked by the need to 
decide among and integrate with a wide range of 
different technical and infrastructure services and 
frameworks. 
The primary measures of efficiency are the total 
cost of research and development (TCD) and the 
total cost of (cloud) operations (TCO). TCD encom-
passes all costs related to the design and devel -
opment of the software, including design, imple -
mentation, testing, and bug fixing. TCO includes 
the cost for operating and supporting the applica -
tion. It also refers to efforts for customers to imple-
ment and operate a solution. Development teams 
need to optimize for both by adhering to the fol -
lowing guidance:
 • Reduce the overall heterogeneity and 
 complexity of technology stacks within SAP. 
This internal harmonization will help us optimize 
costs by reducing redundant development and 
maintenance efforts. Instead, all development 
teams need to proactively seek more reuse. Less 
variation and more focus will also foster 
innovation.
 • Expedite the adoption of central services  (by 
implementing Technology Guidelines ). Kernel 
Services, Unified Services , and others provide 
standardization, drive reuse, and facilitate seam -
less and uniform application integration. They 
contribute to meeting our TCO targets and our 
overall quality criteria by having specialized 
teams focusing on cloud qualities and product 
standard compliance. Central services consis -
tently provide reusable, high-quality capabilities 
to all business applications. The services relieve 
application developers of solving technical 
problems beyond specific business require -
ments. Apart from a technical scope, Unified Ser-
vices also cover aspects such as commerciali -
zation. They facilitate the move from a 
sub scription-based to a consumption-based 
commercial model (as described in the Commit-
to-Consume strategy), which typically requires 
significant architectural changes. Unified Ser -
vices (e.g., Unified Account) centrally provide a 
flexible and solid foundation so that future 
changes of commercial aspects have fewer 
implications for application and service provid -
ers. This foundation will also be an important 
enabler for an open SAP partner ecosystem by 
reducing the technical integration effort on the 
partner side.
 • Use SAP’s opinionated development models 
tailored to business application developers.  
Developers should focus on business logic 
rather than on boilerplate activities and code. 
Development models such as the SAP Cloud 
Application Programming Model (CAP) and 
ABAP Cloud, comprising the ABAP RESTful 
 Application Programming Model (RAP), are the 
default choice for application teams.
 • Adopt standard development processes. SAP 
Hyperspace offers a standard process frame -
work for developing and delivering compliant, 
secure, and high-quality enterprise software. 
The provided templates and tools, such as 
Business Application Development

Page 7:
5 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
preconfigured and secure CI/CD pipelines, 
Golden Images, Cloud Native Buildpacks, etc. 
enable developers to focus on core develop -
ment tasks rather than “reinventing” custom pro -
cesses and tools. Hyperspace also provides 
Paved Roads, which compile best practices and 
provide guidance that can be leveraged by 
developers through the Hyperspace Portal to 
ensure secure-by-default SAP Cloud products 
and deployments to the cloud.
 • Follow best practices and prescribed 
defaults. The Golden Path (internal)  and the 
BTP Developer’s Guide (external), both driven by 
the CPA WG “Cloud Development”  and aligned 
across other related WGs, provide the go-to 
architecture for the majority of BTP-based busi -
ness applications. The Golden Path contains an 
architecture blueprint with a curated list of ser -
vices to integrate with, provides guidance for 
software development and delivery processes, 
and gives instructions on how to deliver on cloud 
qualities and Intelligent Enterprise Suite Quali -
ties. It is equally important to follow the guid -
ance on Optimizing Cost for Cloud Development 
and Operations. This guide provides an overview 
of basic principles for reducing costs by making 
TCO a primary architecture and decision driver 
throughout the whole development process. As 
we can only optimize what we can measure, 
more data points and insights will be needed to 
monitor and drive cost optimization. While teams 
can already address this today by implementing 
TCO-tailored logging and metering, a regular 
analysis of their workload, and a proactive moni -
toring of resource utilization, we aim to also pro -
vide more central support through, e.g., cost 
optimization dashboards, etc. The integration of 
AI capabilities into our development tools will 
also help drive the implicit adoption of develop -
ment best practices and defaults.
 • Support collaborative development by apply-
ing Open Source ( SAP Open Source Manifesto ) 
and InnerSource. Establishing InnerSource, which 
is the application of methodologies and best 
practices from open-source communities to in-
house software development, will improve devel-
opment efficiency and productivity. It also  fosters 
reuse and reduces redundant development 
because teams can influence/extend reuse 
 components with their own contributions.
Business Application Development

Page 8:
6 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
It also aims to provide capabilities to integrate with 
third-party solutions so they can bring their data 
into the SAP data landscape, as well as giving them 
the ability to consume SAP data products while 
complying with data protection and privacy laws. 
SAP’s data architecture is based around a set of 
applications needed to collect, manage, store, 
and process data. For more information, see “Data 
Platform – Architecture“.
With regard to data persistence, SAP HANA Cloud 
forms the core of our data architecture. It has 
expanded beyond the original in-memory data -
base to include data on disk and data persisted in 
low-cost cloud object stores. HANA Cloud and 
HANA Cloud Data Lake instances can be deployed 
together or separately by LoBs when and where 
needed. With the focus on multi-tenancy, cost 
reductions, and scalability, HANA Cloud must be 
the default database, not just for all new cloud 
applications for transaction processing and ana -
lytics, but also for decomposed (micro) services 
as outlined in an ADR for HANA Cloud . In addition 
to new applications, it is expected that cloud 
applications running on HANA 2.0 on-prem ver -
sion should migrate to HANA Cloud. What’s more, 
in many (but not all) cases, existing applications 
running on third-party databases will benefit from 
moving to HANA Cloud as outlined in the HANA 
Cloud ADR. HANA Cloud Data Lake also provides 
a low-cost and scalable data lake storage that can 
be accessed directly from HANA Cloud via both 
federation and replication.
On the compute front, Spark Compute  is to be 
leveraged for scalable, powerful data engineering 
and AI, operating against data in the HANA Cloud 
Data Lake. Spark jobs are used to cleanse, refine, 
and derive data, producing Data Products  that are 
designed for consumption. SAP has partnered 
with Databricks to use their managed Spark ser -
vice, tightly integrated with the HANA Cloud Data 
Lake, with all data persisted in the HANA Cloud 
Data Lake. To mitigate the risk of being fully depen-
dent on third-party technology, an in-house-  
managed Spark service has been built in parallel 
as part of SAP HANA Cloud. The HANA Cloud 
Spark service is initially only being used in the Pro-
curement data platform but is expected to extend 
to other use cases in the future.
SAP Datasphere  (formerly known as Data Ware -
house Cloud with additional data integration fea -
tures) provides data mart capabilities in support 
of analytics (including cross application) and cus -
tom data modeling. It also provides data integra -
tion tools that can be used in conjunction with or 
independently of the data mart. Datasphere is 
being enhanced to provide simple consumption of 
Data Products, as well as the ability to publish 
derived Data Products.
For data visualization and planning, SAP  Analytics 
Cloud (SAC) is the strategic technology choice for 
both standalone and embedded analytics, see 
TG32. SAC OEM (the embedded version, for 
embedding in SAP applications), is being enhanced 
with a lightweight viewer to improve performance 
and a shared application tenant to reduce cost. 
Fiori/UI5 controls are also a lightweight low-cost 
option for embedding individual analytic controls 
in an application.
For distributed data platform architecture, Data 
Products are the cornerstone, as they enable 
sharing data across domains and application 
boundaries. SAP applications, as well as customer 
and partner applications, can easily publish the 
Our vision is to standardize on a common data architecture that centers on 
enabling LoBs, customers, and partners to easily produce and consume data 
across application boundaries. 
Data Management

Page 9:
7 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
metadata describing available Data Products via 
Open Resource Discovery  (ORD). As the ORD 
aggregator, Unified Customer Landscape (UCL) 
will serve as a Data Products Directory, enabling 
applications and users to both find and discover 
Data Products and access the metadata needed 
to consume and understand them in a standard -
ized manner. The Datasphere Catalog will inte -
grate with UCL to facilitate consumption and inte -
gration of Data Products in Datasphere models. 
SAP Business Accelerator Hub will add support 
for Data Products as a resource type, showing all 
Data Products available from SAP applications.
The Data Product concept is taken from data mesh 
architectures, where each domain exposes data 
products that others can consume. Data Products 
are data sets that are exposed for consumption via 
an API and enriched by metadata in form of an 
ORD document describing the data product and 
indicating where and how it can be accessed. Data 
Products can be exposed directly from either an 
application, a HANA Cloud instance, a HANA Data 
Lake, or a Datasphere tenant. Moving forward, the 
strategy is to expose all relevant data needed for 
both data processing and analytics as Data 
Products.
Customers and SAP also need to be able to com -
bine data from different applications. To do this, 
two things are needed – the ability to uniquely 
identify business objects in their system land -
scape and the ability to map the data semantics of 
one application to those of another. For the for -
mer, applications need to expose data with ODM 
IDs (OIDs) and for the latter, applications need to 
expose data that complies with the ODM 2.0 rules 
and guidelines . Instead of creating only new 
aligned integration models, ODM 2.0 is designed 
to extend existing APIs, Events, and Data Products. 
ODM enables additional metadata to interconnect 
data from various applications semantically. In due 
course, most business objects exposed by Data 
Products are expected to be ODM compliant.
Because the data is accessed for business trans -
actions or analytics, it is important to ensure that 
SAP complies with the local data protection and 
privacy laws. As more countries recognize the 
importance of mature and secure Data Privacy 
and Protection  (DPP) legislation to ensure their 
sovereignty, covering the increasing complexity of 
the different country-specific DPP requirements 
and legislation is expected to become more chal -
lenging in the future. Our aim is to provide the high-
est standards for DPP across all SAP products and 
provide a single access point to customers for DPP 
information requests or information data access 
reports for all products. The goal is to integrate 
LoB-specific DPP solutions with the Data  Privacy 
Integration Kernel Service in a federated approach 
for the creation, processing, transfer, and destruc -
tion of personal data across application boundar -
ies. For more details on data processing based on 
purpose, refer to the vision of the Working Group 
“Data Protection and Privacy”.
In addition, it is important that all data manage -
ment stores be able to use customer-specific 
encryption keys to encrypt relevant data at rest. 
All applications and services must adopt these 
capabilities. Customers may also opt in to manage 
their encryption keys. The central key manage -
ment will be enabled through a kernel service that 
integrates internally with SAP’s Data Custodian 
Key Management Service for the customer-  
managed-keys scenario.
Data Management

Page 10:
8 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
As of mid-2023, SAP developed more than 
130 embedded AI scenarios. SAP projects can be 
generally categorized into the following AI capabili-
ties: machine learning (ML), natural language pro -
cessing (NLP), conversational AI, computer vision, 
and semantic technologies. SAP’s vision is to infuse 
GenAI-powered innovations across all cloud busi -
ness applications and BTP, embed SAP’s Digital 
Assistant (Joule) in all products, and build SAP-spe-
cific foundational models. Generative AI capabili -
ties will be offered to our partners and customers 
to build and extend applications. For this purpose, 
we will provide enterprise-grade qualities, includ -
ing data privacy and security. We will also support 
the flexibility to adapt to the continuous emergence 
of new use cases and the ongoing evolution of 
GenAI technology.
For the conversational experience, SAP’s Digital 
Assistant (Joule) will be embedded throughout 
SAP’s cloud enterprise portfolio, delivering proac -
tive and contextualized insights from across the 
breadth and depth of SAP solutions and third-party 
sources. When building conversational capabilities 
for our business software, we strongly recommend 
integrating with Joule rather than starting from 
scratch and/or leverage third-party solutions.
The large language model (LLM) market is highly 
dynamic, and as new vendors enter the market and 
open-source models become competitive, costs 
are likely to go down and models will specialize. 
Therefore, SAP will centrally contract, validate, and 
provide access to LLMs from multiple vendors and 
take care of many non-functional aspects such as 
security or metering. For this, a generative AI hub 
in AI Core will be provided to SAP business applica-
tions along with SAP tooling for infrastructure and 
software development (e.g., code generation). LoBs 
should use the generative AI hub to access 
provided LLMs. For more information, refer to “Large 
Language Model Access at SAP”.
LLMs come with a significant amount of knowledge, 
but they do not contain information beyond the 
original training data set, such as SAP-specific infor-
mation or customer-specific information that might 
be relevant for a use case. To address this limita -
tion, business data, semantics, and metadata need 
to be incorporated into an LLM request to ground 
the LLM. To that end, the generative AI hub will pro-
vide capabilities to integrate with SAP’s data plat -
form. On top of that, SAP HANA Cloud will provide a 
vector database capability for storing embeddings 
and conducting efficient similarity searches. SAP 
will adapt LLMs to its context and create its own dif-
ferentiated foundation model that incorporates 
structured data and business process knowledge 
with GPT/4HANA. In addition, KG/4HANA  will pro -
vide semantic context (e.g., via Knowledge Graphs) 
to enable natural-language-based access and 
knowledge-driven exploration of SAP data, as well 
as to scale the training of foundation models.
SAP is committed to trustworthy and responsi -
ble AI, adhering to a rigorous AI Ethics policy that is 
binding for all employees. The policy is continu -
ously updated in line with the UNESCO’s AI Ethics 
recommendations. It is recommended that the 
AI  Ethics Assessment Process be followed while 
building use cases with AI features and functional -
ity. Prioritizing data protection and privacy, SAP 
implements measures such as partner agreements 
and legal intake processes and uses SAP-hosted 
models. Security in AI is emphasized through edu -
cation programs and countermeasures against 
threats like data tampering and AI hallucinations. 
SAP is also investing in Explainable AI (XAI) to boost 
trust and security by making AI-generated outputs 
transparent.
Recent breakthroughs in generative AI (GenAI) have created  
new opportunities that go far beyond what has been possible until today.
Artificial Intelligence

Page 11:
9 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
For more information on SAP strategy on Genera -
tive AI, refer to the Generative AI Technology 
 Strategy Whitepaper. More guidance for engineer -
ing teams developing LLM use cases can be found 
at the CPA Working Group “AI”.
Artificial Intelligence

Page 12:
10 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
The current reality is that we are still selling indi -
vidual applications and services that differ signifi -
cantly in product experiences – e.g., with respect 
to provisioning, integration, and configuration. 
Most of the integration efforts are still offloaded to 
the customer. We need to address this by putting 
an even stronger focus on enabling a consistent 
SaaS-like experience instead of forcing customers 
into a PaaS-like (platform as a service) experience, 
asking them to create and manage the technical 
wiring between our applications (creating and 
maintaining service instances, copying creden -
tials, etc.) on their own.
The foundation for delivering a cloud-like integra -
tion experience is to clearly separate technical and 
business integration (see Beyond Zones). Techni-
cal integration refers to all tasks related to setting 
up the technical wiring between applications and/
or services. This includes establishing trust (e.g., 
by setting up mutual TLS or OAuth-based authen ti-
cation), the provisioning of integration services (e.g., 
Kernel Services) or the application-specific config-
uration of connections. Business integration, on the 
other hand, refers to all business-related integra -
tion decisions that the customer makes and mani -
fests by configuring such a business integration, 
specifying the intent that different applications (or 
tenants to be more specific) be integrated with each 
other. These business integration decisions are fully 
managed by the customer (customer-managed) as 
they provide the needed flexibility for customers to 
configure their business processes. All the required 
underlying technical integrations, on the other hand, 
need to be handled automatically by SAP, without 
the customer even noticing (SAP-managed).
Taking this even further, we need to deliver smart 
integration defaults and out-of-the-box automa -
tion wherever possible. For business integrations, 
this means that customers get proposals that 
match their business intent and landscape setup. 
Preferably, these proposals are provided as part 
of a central UI that facilitates provisioning, integra -
tion, and configuration in a harmonized experi -
ence. Customers can follow our proposals or 
adjust them to their specific needs. A thorough 
understanding of the as-is landscape (provided 
via landscape introspection capabilities) and 
architecture templates that model landscape 
options (provided via architecture blueprints) form 
the technical basis for smart defaults and the 
underlying technical automation. Architecture 
blueprints can be seen as executable reference 
architectures that describe how applications and 
services are combined into business solutions. 
They are complemented with information about 
the current landscape and are enriched with cus -
tomer input where required. The required land -
scape data is provided through Unified Landscape 
Introspection (ULI) capabilities and is retrieved 
from different source such as the Cloud Land -
scape Directory (CLD), Unified Customer Land -
scape (UCL), or Open Resource Discovery  (ORD) 
for data on APIs and Events. The resulting solution 
blueprint is the basis for a declarative description 
of the target landscape, the so-called desired 
state.
Many of the capabilities mentioned above (the 
separation of customer-managed business and 
SAP-managed technical integrations, automation 
based on blueprints, etc.) are facilitated by the 
Unified Services (Unified Provisioning, Unified 
Offering a seamlessly integrated suite of products to our customers remains one 
of our most important strategic aspirations and SAP’s unique selling proposition. 
It is a fundamental prerequisite for being able to offer end-to-end business 
processes and elevate cross-sell opportunities. 
Integration

Page 13:
11 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
Account, Unified Customer Landscape etc.). They 
provide an LoB-agnostic set of services that eases 
the integration of applications and services both 
within SAP and for partner solutions. Unified Ser -
vices allow service providers to centrally register 
their services as resources in a central repository 
to be consumed by others – independent of where 
and how the services are built. Depending on the 
needs of the provider, not only can Unified Ser -
vices be used to orchestrate provisioning and inte-
gration, they can also address concerns like com -
mercialization or metering. It should be noted that 
the objective is not to rip and replace existing 
tools and services but to provide a central control 
plane that glues together the puzzle pieces into a 
coherent view. Inspired by Kubernetes, Unified 
Services try to achieve this by implementing an 
operator pattern, observing declarative requests 
(the desired state), and acting to fulfill them (the 
actual state). Instead of configuring technical 
details imperatively on each singular customer 
system, customers will be able to declare changes 
to their systems at an abstract level that reflects 
their business needs, while the required technical 
and configuration changes will be automated and 
managed by SAP and/or partners.
Apart from streamlining the setup of integrations, we 
also strive for more guidance and best practices as 
to which patterns should be used to develop inte -
grations across applications. Concrete use cases for 
integrations include, for example, data distribution, 
process integration, and side-by-side process 
extensions. We aim to provide more guardrails for 
all cases as to which patterns (e.g., request-driven 
vs. event-driven) and technology should be used by 
the development teams at SAP. As an example, for 
master data we have an aligned target architecture 
consisting of Master Data Integration (MDI) as the 
service for replication, entity services as reuse ser-
vices, and the data architecture for analytical master 
data consumption.
For services that are shared across different appli-
cation tenants, for example, MDI, Event Broker, Cen-
tral Entry Point (CEP), Task Center etc., semantics 
and behavior of the tenant IDs currently need to be 
aligned with the involved applications, leading to 
inconsistencies, duplicate efforts, and disruption of 
integration flows in case tenants are moved from 
one data center to another. To overcome this, Global 
Tenant ID (GTID) must be adopted as a common, 
stable, and unique way to identify the tenants.
Integration

Page 14:
12 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
SAP BTP consists of services, runtimes, and capa -
bilities that are contributed by various organizations 
in SAP. Detailed information about the foundational 
topics and technologies on SAP BTP’s way forward 
during the next five years can be found in the 2023 
BTP Foundation Technology Strategy paper.
BTP is moving towards a service-centric 
approach, and we bundle these services for cus -
tomer-facing offerings. To provide the core capa -
bilities of an ecosystem, BTP – as the foundation 
of SAP’s Business SaaS offerings – is transforming 
from the current runtime-centric approach toward 
a multi-cloud, service-centric, and open ecosys -
tem. All BTP capabilities will be consumable inde -
pendent of the runtime used. We will also remove 
dependencies on specific implementation details 
of BTP services to reduce the architectural com -
plexity. By eliminating the need for service con -
sumers to comply with such implementation spe -
cifics of BTP-provided services, we will reduce the 
current strong coupling among BTP services and 
their consumers. That way we will be able to drive 
the evolution of BTP more efficiently and to adapt 
to changing requirements faster. Consumers will 
also have more flexibility both when they are 
building solutions on top of BTP, and when they 
are just consuming individual services.
BTP currently acts as a virtual technical platform 
provider across different hyperscalers and will be 
available on SAP Converged Cloud in SAP data 
centers as well. By means of Unified Services , SAP 
BTP is also extending its capabilities toward pro -
viding a seamless integration into a harmonized, 
yet flexible commercial and operational frame -
work. BTP can then be used more flexibly by any 
solution as the platform to integrate into the SAP 
ecosystem. It enables developers to leverage all 
enterprise-grade BTP services, without the need 
to adapt the solution architecture to the technical 
concepts of BTP. In addition, BTP provides the 
option to leverage hyperscaler or third-party ser -
vices. This provides a high degree of flexibility to 
support evolutionary changes and quick time-to-
market options for applications and services. We 
avoid the need for short-term implementations of 
new and sometimes immature platform features, 
which increase the risk of weakening the overall 
enterprise qualities of BTP itself. In case of an 
increasing demand, we still have the option to 
implement requested new capabilities on BTP at a 
later point in time. Thus, we can ensure that all SAP 
quality criteria and the right level of maturity are 
met. For SAP application and service develop -
ment teams, more guidance can be found in  
 Working with Hyperscalers and PlusOne .
Enhancing the overall customer experience for 
fully integrated business solutions when leverag -
ing multiple SAP solutions is part of the overall 
SAP strategy. An essential part is providing a seam-
less SaaS experience for our customers – both 
within our own portfolio and with partner solu -
tions. In addition to direct application-to-applica -
tion integration, BTP also supports the Integration 
for SaaS scenario, where selected BTP services 
provide integration technologies (Master Data 
Integration, Event Broker, Task Center, etc.) for SAP 
applications (see chapter “Integrations”).
We are also harmonizing the various concepts and 
technologies that are currently used within SAP for 
tenant provisioning and integration management. 
The SAP Business Technology Platform (BTP) provides the technical foundation 
for our LoBs, customers, and partners. It is mission critical to SAP’s strategy as 
documented in SAP’s Corporate Strategy 2023 paper. One of SAP’s strategic 
priorities is to “Make our SAP BTP the platform for SAP and our ecosystem.”
Business Technology Platform

Page 15:
13 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
Business Technology Platform
The goal is one holistic but flexible approach. The 
existing BTP-specific subscription management 
also evolves towards this one harmonized 
approach. The target state is to provide technical 
services and capabilities to holistically manage 
application tenants and all related integrations 
during their complete lifecycle and across all SAP 
products and partner solutions, regardless of 
whether these solutions are based on a BTP run -
time or not. These capabilities are based on the 
fundamental architectural concepts of the Unified 
Services as described in the “ Integrations” chap -
ter. Consequently, we need to smoothly evolve the 
BTP multi-tenancy approach and untangle vari-
ous orthogonal aspects (tenant, region, trust, secu-
rity, commercial, etc.) that are currently tightly cou-
pled to the concept of a local BTP subaccount.
In parallel to the automated provisioning and inte -
gration lifecycle management, the appropriate level 
of control is provided to customers, allowing them 
to adapt the configuration to their business-specific 
needs. This approach allows SAP customers to 
focus on their core business operations while we 
handle the technical aspects of their applications 
and integration. We ensure flexibility without the 
need for customers to understand or work with BTP 
PaaS concepts like subaccounts or runtimes when 
they are configuring and managing their SAP solu -
tions and the related integrations. This harmoniza -
tion also strives to deliver automated orchestration 
of the customer system landscape and the 
related integrations. At any time, customers will 
be able to get an overview of their actual land -
scape, including BTP-based applications, BTP-
external LoB solutions, connected on-prem solu -
tions, partner solutions, registered third-party 
systems, and the related integrations. All landscape 
information will be accessible via the Unified Land-
scape Introspection based on Unified Metadata 
Service (UMS) as machine-readable data, so that 
applications can smartly react to changes and 
extensions of the customer’s system landscape.
A vibrant partner ecosystem around SAP’s cloud 
offerings has been desired for a long time. With 
Unified Services being part of BTP, we will provide 
the technical foundation for an open SAP ecosys -
tem. Functionality like seamless integration into 
the SAP marketplace or leveraging fully managed 
metering and billing infrastructure will not only be 
available SAP internally, it will also be offered to 
partners to build a vital and growing ecosystem 
around SAP’s core business solutions. For part -
ners and independent software vendors (ISVs), we 
will lower the entry barrier by providing more guid-
ance, frameworks, and tools. Partners and ISVs 
will be able to offer and monetize their solutions 
on the SAP marketplace, regardless of whether 
their solutions are built on a BTP runtime or not.
We are also untangling the cloud services manage-
ment, including account and subscription manage-
ment, provisioning, integration management, meter-
ing, and commercialization from the core BTP PaaS 
capabilities and providing them as decoupled 
 Unified Services. This allows all non-BTP SAP appli-
cations and partner solutions to leverage them as 
well. When fully leveraging BTP as the platform for 
developing and hosting a business solution, inte -
gration into the SAP ecosystem is provided out-of-
the-box without any additional effort. Business 
solutions that do not use BTP PaaS capabilities can 
still benefit from BTP by consuming any of the BTP-
provided services. All business solutions must 
adopt Unified Services to be seamlessly integrated 
into the SAP ecosystem and made available to cus-
tomers through the SAP Marketplace.
BTP provides all its PaaS capabilities in the form 
of enterprise-grade services and qualities that are 
underpinning the Golden Path guidance to increase 
the efficiency of SAP developers. These PaaS enter-
prise-grade capabilities include connectivity, inte -
gration, reliability, scalability, compliance, security, 
operational aspects, and multi-cloud abstraction. 
To further improve the overall platform experience 
and developer efficiency, customer-facing APIs are 
constantly being enhanced and the automation 
capabilities are being extended.
SAP’s solutions offer dependable audits and com-
pliance checks, covering various national and inter-
national standards related to information security

Page 16:
14 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
Business Technology Platform
and data protection. For this data protection and 
privacy (DPP) aspect, BTP also caters to special 
requirements such as “EU Access Only” for sensi -
tive industries as part of these PaaS capabilities.
We are introducing capabilities in BTP that enable 
it to be run in Private and Sovereign Clouds.  
This expands our business opportunities, as it 
allows customers to run BTP workloads in their 
own data centers or dedicated data centers to ful-
fill specific regulatory and/or legal requirements. 
We also support “air-gapped” environments where 
dedicated operators handle SRE (Site Reliability 
Engineering) responsibilities. Technologically, 
 Gardener and IronCore (aka “Gardener on Metal”) 
will support these distributed environments with a 
consistent approach to infrastructure manage -
ment. However, there will also be changes to pro -
cesses, operational models, software delivery, 
cloud services management, and core platform 
services to accommodate Private Cloud.

Page 17:
15 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
Deployments of cloud solutions are preferably 
located in consolidated locations to avoid complex-
ity in operations and support. Aligned placement of 
deployments across the entire SAP portfolio is 
therefore required to support the best experience 
for customers, maximize business value, and to opti-
mize our delivery efficiency and TCO.
In addition, consumption of each service either 
locally in each infrastructure region (CAT-1), or 
cross consumption across infrastructure once per 
region (CAT-2), or once globally (CAT-3) is deter -
mined via a categorization  based on technical, 
legal, and regulatory aspects like data residency 
requirements. It’s important that services that are 
offered for cross-consumption be remotely acces-
sible from any infrastructure region, especially the 
CAT-2 and CAT-3 services. This includes, but is not 
limited to, decoupling from the current BTP subac-
count, ensuring that the service supports authenti -
cation with SSO, integrated audit logs, ready-to-
use tenant setups, compliance with regulatory 
requirements, etc.
To react faster to growing customer demands, SAP 
also needs to provide more flexibility regarding 
the presence of our products (including BTP) in 
new regions and markets. For BTP and its related 
services, this is planned to be achieved via 
 satellites and ground stations. Ground stations are 
infrastructure regions with a CloudFoundry land -
scape and a BTP Region local control plane. Satel-
lites are a group of services deployed into an infra-
structure region where no BTP ground station is 
present. With this approach, we expect to cover 
both the legal obligations for data residency and 
data protection and privacy in the respective 
regions. It complements the 4+1 strategy and opti-
mizes the SAP-wide global rollout. Multi-provider 
portability to avoid expensive vendor lock-in situ -
ation can be achieved by applying a combination 
of SAP and hyperscaler technology (e.g., utilizing 
SAP Gardener for infrastructure abstraction, utiliz -
ing BTP services, building a strategy for native ser -
vice substitution with equivalent BTP services, 
etc.). SAP PlusOne is of strategic importance to 
SAP. It gives us a strategic alternative in case geo-
political, customer demand and competitive offer -
ings requires SAP to reconsider previously sup -
ported infrastructure choices. When developing a 
new public cloud solution, using PlusOne as Infra -
structure as a Service (IaaS) and BTP as PaaS is 
recommended. Any major changes/additions to 
the infrastructure need to be discussed and jointly 
agreed upon with the Cloud Delivery Board . For 
more information, refer to Working with Hyper -
scalers and PlusOne.
Increased demand for compliance with industry, 
regulatory, and security standards is essential for 
continued trust of our customers in SAP solutions. 
SAP Business Technology Platform complies with 
ISO/BS standards, System and Organization Con -
trols (SOC), certifications for industry-specific 
offerings, regional offerings, accessibility, sustain -
ability, ethics, etc. Some examples for such certifi -
cations are Cloud Computing Compliance Con -
trols Catalogue (abbreviated “C5”), EU Cloud Code 
of Conduct (CoC), ISO/IEC 27001, SOC1/2, etc. For 
more details on the current state of certifications 
and attestations, refer to the Compliance Finder of 
SAP Trust Center.
In addition to the SAP public cloud offerings, the 
private cloud demand of customers for selected 
solutions will be addressed depending on the 
business case, considering the costs for applica -
tions and platform services. The private cloud will 
One of SAP’s important goals is to reduce the SAP-wide TCO.  
To achieve this, we need to optimize the overall deployment footprint  
and move towards global hub like service offerings. 
Global Availability and Rollout Strategy

Page 18:
16 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
address a shielded and isolated operation of SAP 
solutions that is fully under the control of the cus -
tomer and operated either by in-house personnel 
or a third party.
SAP offers sovereign clouds  for countries that 
have additional regulations requiring public sector 
and regulated industries to meet extensive addi -
tional security levels for their cloud workloads. 
SAP Sovereign Cloud offerings are deployments of 
security-hardened SAP cloud solutions that are 
designed to adhere to national security and 
secrecy requirements such as government accred-
itation, attestation, or certification programs like 
FedRAMP in the USA, ISM and PSPF in ANZ, and 
CyberEssentials+ in the UK. Sovereign clouds are 
operated within the respective country by SAP 
personnel with a security clearance by the local 
government. Sovereign clouds and private clouds 
differ a lot in the cloud commercial model as well 
as the cloud operations and delivery model. For 
more information about sovereign cloud require -
ments, countries planned, security hardening pro -
cedures, etc. refer to SAP Sovereign Cloud 
Services.
Applications and services deliver mission critical 
use cases for customers. Implementing High 
Availability and Disaster Recovery patterns can 
help sustain failures in multiple layers (infrastruc -
ture, platform, and application) of our solutions 
and provide more business resilient solutions. To 
increase resilience against disastrous events like 
floods, earthquakes, terror attacks, and similar, 
geo-distant failover mechanisms with redundant 
setups are recommended. Protection from data 
loss and keeping our solutions highly available not 
just for business continuity, but also for business 
resilience, is the goal. 
Global Availability and Rollout Strategy

Page 19:
17 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
However, the integration must not be separate for 
every application – all SAP applications should be 
perceived as one solution. Thus, we need a central 
endpoint for managing authentication, user man -
agement, and authorization assignments within all 
SAP applications that must also support the SaaS 
experience of BTP. SAP Cloud Identity services  
(SCI) are the key enabler for that. While some cus -
tomers expect an end-to-end IAM solution from 
SAP, SCI will only be sufficient for rather simple 
cases, and we will not invest in building an end-to-
end solution but refer to partners to complement 
SCI.
The integration of third-party IAM solutions must 
be based on open standards. The central end -
point must both provide a high degree of flexibility 
and be able to integrate well with business net -
work identity providers (esp. Ariba Network and 
Fieldglass) and SAP Customer Data Cloud for cus -
tomer IAM scenarios. It must also enable access to 
SAP assets (esp. SAP Universal ID integration).
While the customer’s identity provider is used for 
end user authentication ( TG02.R1), we need a sin -
gle token issuer at SAP to enable the principal 
propagation across all components within the SAP 
ecosystem, removing the current need for point-
to-point trust setups ( TG02.R5). As the SAP eco -
system includes cross-identity consumption sce -
narios, this token service must be able to bridge 
the SAP identity domain with other identity 
domains, e.g., with Azure Active Directory for 
Microsoft Teams integration.
For service-to-service communication (especially 
SAP-to-SAP), we will introduce cross-platform 
automated distribution of service identities 
(especially SAP Cloud Root CA-based) and the 
rotation of the relevant keys. Technically this is 
enabled by the Zero Trust Identity Service of BTP.
Improving and harmonizing identity management 
across all SAP solutions is a substantial contribu -
tion to improving the overall user and application 
onboarding experience. For that, we defined an 
SAP-wide SCIM (System for Cross-domain Identity 
Management) API ( TG16), which can be used by 
customers to provision users and user-to-role/
group assignments into applications through har -
monized SCIM APIs and templates. To achieve the 
“SAP as a whole” goal, we need a bridgehead to 
be used by third-party identity management tools 
to provision users and assignments. This bridge -
head then automatically replicates the data to SAP 
applications. The bridgehead is technically pro -
vided by SCI.
While we cover central user-to-role/group assign -
ment with the SAP-wide SCIM API, we do not fore -
see going for a single authorization engine across 
SAP. Only for BTP and apps that opt in will we stan-
dardize on the Authorization Management service 
(AMS) of SCI. For backwards compatibility, BTP 
XSUAA needs to morph into SCI.
We will also extend the authorization capabilities 
for privileged access management, e.g., by provid -
ing a mechanism to assign elevated privileges to a 
user who can execute critical business functions 
(e.g., in case the main responsible user is unavail -
able). This needs to be done with corresponding 
logging and monitoring of the user’s activities to 
ensure traceability and authorization based on the 
“need to know” and “least privileged” principles 
during the temporary elevation. We also need 
Many customers have a company-wide identity strategy and a preferred  
solution for identity management. Our cloud applications must be able to 
integrate with them. 
Authentication, Authorization,  
and Identity Lifecycle Management

Page 20:
18 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
these mechanisms for customer-internal support 
and for SAP development support, who require 
access to the data in customer applications / ten -
ants. Privileged access to cloud landscape and 
-infrastructure will be addressed in the following 
chapter “Cloud Delivery and Operations”.
Authentication, Authorization,  
and Identity Lifecycle Management

Page 21:
19 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
This guidance is complemented by the use of stan-
dardized tools like Service Provider Cockpit and 
technologies like Gardener, Unified Gateway, 
HANA Cloud, etc., thus reducing the entropy – all 
to positively impact SAP’s cloud scale readiness, 
operational efficiency, cloud margin, and profits in 
the mid- and long-term.
Delivering SaaS solutions allows SAP and our cus -
tomers to tremendously save costs by leveraging 
synergies, reusing services, and reducing invest -
ments into infrastructure, support, and mainte -
nance. However, this only happens if some foun -
dational requirements are met. SaaS solutions 
across the industry usually come with a service 
level agreement (SLA) of around 99.9XX% 
 availability. To illustrate this further, an SLA of 
99.99% translates to unavailability of a system for 
8.6 seconds daily, 1:48 mins weekly, 4:21 mins 
monthly, 13:2.4 mins quarterly, or 52:9.8 mins 
yearly. To achieve such a level of resiliency, appli -
cations and services need to safeguard against 
unplanned downtimes by avoiding single points of 
failure, introducing redundancy, and reducing 
dependencies. Defects must be detected as early 
as possible in the development lifecycle, e.g., by 
automated test strategies. Planned downtimes 
must be restricted and concepts need to be put in 
place to avoid such downtimes in case of upgrades 
and updates. At the same time, measures towards 
resiliency must not limit our speed of innovation 
and our ability to deliver new code at a rapid pace 
without fear of regression or unplanned outages. 
Consequently, concepts such as controlled 
release of new behavior via phased rollout and 
feature toggles must be leveraged.
One key aspect of a SaaS solution is elasticity.  
SaaS solutions need to scale up, scale down, 
SaaS solutions need to be secure, reliable, scalable, and cost-optimized.  
This is enabled by providing clear direction on product architecture, ensuring 
a holistic, efficient global use of our 4+1 infrastructure. 
Cloud Delivery and Operations
scale-in, or scale-out automatically based on the 
current load situation. The solutions that are run -
ning idle need to be automatically downsized to 
minimize infrastructure costs. At the same time, 
sufficient resources need to be available for a sta -
ble and performant operation. It is recommended 
that costs be monitored regularly for resource uti -
lization and service plans, in addition to designing 
for cost efficiency. This is a circular process with 
applications being redesigned, resized, recalcu -
lated, and continuously optimized.
Running SaaS solutions also leads to responsibil -
ity for observing the same. Successful 
 observability means regularly monitoring the 
complete processes end to end across the distrib-
uted application and service landscapes, soft -
ware, hardware, and network health status, e.g., 
API Insights for visibility on API traffic for SAP ten -
ants. To enable the exposure, ingestion, routing & 
processing, and consumption of cross-LoB end-
to-end telemetry signals, Open Telemetry  (OTLP) 
is the chosen SAP-wide standard that needs to be 
followed. Applications can continue using their 
existing telemetry mechanisms and integrate the 
current telemetry signals using the Open Teleme -
try Collectors. Refer to the CPA ADRs for formats 
and protocols of Metrics , Trace Correlation , and 
Logs. With OTLP established as the common stan -
dard for telemetry signals and a cross-LoB routing 
and processing service available, the producers of 
telemetry signals can be decoupled from poten -
tial consumers and access and consumption of 
telemetry signals can be standardized. The focus 
can then be on the data necessary for different 
monitoring use cases rather than on individual, 
often proprietary, point-to-point integrations to 
ingest them. For more details, refer to the Observ -
ability vision . Early warning capabilities can help

Page 22:
20 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
minimize the risk of outages. Once it comes to an 
outage, meaningful error codes and distributed 
tracing help identify the problem faster and alert -
ing can help keeping the time to solve the problem 
as low as possible. With standardization of log -
ging, monitoring, and tracing mechanisms, more 
automated healing mechanisms can also be 
deployed. The overall result is a much better cus -
tomer experience, less costs, vendor neutrality, 
better alerting, and faster resolution of customer 
issues.
In addition to business-application-specific log -
ging, all business applications and cloud services 
that are offered to customers and/or process cus -
tomer data must ensure active application and 
security event logging. Products and services must 
integrate their security event logs into the SAP cor-
porate SIEM (Security Incident and Event Man-
agement) central services. The integrity of the 
logs must be protected from unauthorized change, 
continuously monitored, and reviewed. It is the 
responsibility of the application and service owner 
to ensure that logs are generated and at least tem-
porarily stored on the IT assets until collected by 
the central SIEM infrastructure, if not transported 
to SIEM directly. Refer to the SAP Threat Detection 
and Response Management Standard for more 
details about minimum log requirements. Also 
refer to the product standard requirement 
 SEC-215: Log security relevant events.
Another key aspect of secure cloud delivery is the 
Zero Trust Network.  In addition to the public 
cloud applications, SAP also has many internal 
backend applications where security is equally 
important. It needs to be ensured that different 
use cases run on dedicated landscapes, support 
encrypted communication, and any API calls are 
access-limited with authentication and authoriza -
tion with SAP approved identity providers as 
described in “ Authentication, Authorization, and 
Identity Lifecycle Management ”. In addition, 
access privileges to the cloud production 
infrastructure, such as IaaS resources and sys -
tems, need to be controlled via central access ser-
vices in accordance with the security product 
 standard. In line with Zero Trust principles and to 
control access to cloud resources, the central 
access services enable admins and operators with 
a standardized and secure E2E access path to 
cloud infrastructure resources. For example: An 
administrator with privileged access to systems for 
patching or troubleshooting or an operator for 
configuration of network policies is authorized to 
access cloud infrastructure resources if the central 
access system controls a secure authentication, 
checks for a healthy device posture, and manages 
access.
A key aspect of a Zero Trust architecture is Key & 
Secret Management.  SAP systems that deploy 
or maintain access to other systems via machine-
usable keys, credentials, or secrets should ensure 
that these are encrypted in the SAP business 
applications. In addition, credentials must not be 
hardcoded into the application or stored in source 
code. Instead, using a secure vault or credential 
store is required. Also, keys and secrets must com-
ply with the corporate security requirements – key 
length, algorithms, retention, key rotation, etc.
SAP needs to deliver its software consistently, 
automatically, and frequently. Open Component 
Model is a building block in the delivery toolset. 
Using one aligned software component model for 
every LoB is recommended, whereas for services 
owned by BTP its use is mandatory. Further, clear 
Asset Management and Ownership  needs to 
be provided for all SAP assets, artifacts, and ser -
vices deployed into the cloud. Such resources 
must be maintained and kept up- to-date in the 
Central Configuration Item Repository (CCIR). This 
includes proper mapping into the SAP organiza -
tional structure and cost center metrics. Owner -
less accounts, resources, and services must be 
deactivated and finally securely deleted (garbage 
collection).
Cloud Delivery and Operations

Page 23:
21 | 21
North Star Architecture Strategy 2024
INTERNAL – SAP  Only
Localization is a well-understood topic inside SAP, 
requiring just the right level of execution across 
the lifespan of any SAP solution, to enable our cus-
tomers to focus on sustainable business practices 
and market growth across the globe. The other 
four priorities define the prevailing vectors from 
which the direction of the North Star is derived.
The nine overarching topic areas covered in this 
North Star document describe the various archi -
tectural aspects that need to be addressed when 
following our corporate strategy and delivering on 
our SAP mission. There are many important details 
or even larger aspects that cannot be covered in 
such a strategy document. However, you will find 
that most of these are discussed and driven in one 
of the workstreams within the Cross-Product Archi-
tecture working groups.
The Cross-Product Architecture is continuously 
evolving to adapt to the technical evolution around 
us, but also to constantly improve efficiency and 
As defined in the deep dive section of SAP’s Corporate Strategy 2023,  
the five cross priorities for all of us are Integration, Embedded AI, Next-Gen UX, 
Cloud Operational Excellence, and Localization. 
A Final Word
the overall user experience, and to cover new 
requirements. It is therefore essential that you 
make use of the various existing communication 
channels of CPA to keep yourself up to date about 
Cross Product Architecture topics (see Participat -
ing in CPA).
Sometimes changes or new architectural concepts 
have a significant impact on the existing codebase 
and consequently require a certain investment to 
adapt to these concepts. On the other hand, if the 
overall value for SAP and for our customers is big -
ger than the investment, these efforts will always 
pay off over time.
And finally, technical evolutions should not lead to 
disruptions for customers regarding user experi -
ence or any needed migration. It should be one of 
our mantras that every technical evolution we 
drive, independent of its complexity, will be a 
smooth evolution for our existing customers, but 
probably a revolution for any new SAP customer.

Links Found:
- http://www.sap.com/legal-notice (Page 2)
- https://d.dam.sap.com/s/i/a/HgTh7xj/SAP Corporate Strategy Whitepaper January 2023.pdf (Page 3)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/CPA/landing-page/ (Page 3)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/sites/206991?xsdata=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%3D%3D&sdata=ZDRFSWVoWVJmRGkvT0cxOWtyVHMyYXFrR0dxdUdxY1hKTkhod0NUOTN0VT0%3D&ovuser=42f7676c-f455-423c-82f6-dc2d99791af7%2Cpriyanka.porwal%40sap.com&OR=Teams-HL&CT=1693540106200&clickparams=eyJBcHBOYW1lIjoiVGVhbXMtRGVza3RvcCIsIkFwcFZlcnNpb24iOiIyOC8yMzA3MDMwNzM0NiIsIkhhc0ZlZGVyYXRlZFVzZXIiOmZhbHNlfQ%3D%3D (Page 3)
- https://one.int.sap/company/management_systems/development_quality_management_system/product_standards (Page 3)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/CPA/landing-page/working-groups/ (Page 3)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/CPA/landing-page/working-groups/ (Page 3)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/CPA/landing-page/technology-guidelines/ (Page 3)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/uxc (Page 4)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/Acc (Page 4)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/t/CPAUserExperience/EYDQKtzRoKlKu1s5TStxCBsB4QMcqXVEKkH4ZLJ1iNWRNg?e=Fh5trL&xsdata=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%3D%3D&sdata=Z2JnclZnamw1OVBJaGx6azVkelV6UWJlMjZDN2tweEp1U2IyNkpjMjE4ND0%3D&ovuser=42f7676c-f455-423c-82f6-dc2d99791af7%2Caxel.schroeder01%40sap.com (Page 4)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/t/CPAUserExperience/EQiFeGDibi5FosQwUJFYarwBSkCsW6rKnl85afrmNm4r-A?e=peJafS&xsdata=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%3D%3D&sdata=dTZDV1NXRnN5SUVUbDVqNXlqZk9UMStMZ2JjZm5NU2Z4eDJIbUEvT1QyMD0%3D&ovuser=42f7676c-f455-423c-82f6-dc2d99791af7%2Caxel.schroeder01%40sap.com (Page 4)
- https://experience.sap.com/internal/fiori-design-web/ (Page 4)
- https://experience.sap.com/internal/fiori-design-web/ (Page 4)
- https://btpx.frontify.com/ (Page 4)
- https://btpx.frontify.com/document/222664#/overview/command-line-interfaces (Page 4)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/sites/117628/SAPUXOrganization/SitePages/The-InnerSource-Model-for-the-SAP-Design-System.aspx?xsdata=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%3D%3D&sdata=S2RBbE9IdGhUNXVXbzlLWjhKdkk4MHFFY0xpckc5TGt0UDRIT20vYUFxTT0%3D&ovuser=42f7676c-f455-423c-82f6-dc2d99791af7%2Caxel.schroeder01%40sap.com (Page 4)
- https://experience.sap.com/internal/fiori-design-web/web-components-overview/#component-overview (Page 4)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/ui/ui/strategy/ (Page 4)
- https://ui5.sap.com/ (Page 4)
- https://github.com/SAP/ui5-webcomponents-react (Page 4)
- https://github.com/SAP/ui5-webcomponents-ngx (Page 4)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/hyperspace/academy_staging/pavedroad/webcomponents/v1.0/ (Page 4)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/hyperspace/academy_staging/pavedroad/webcomponents/v1.0/ (Page 4)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/main/tg17 (Page 4)
- https://frontrunners.eu10.hcs.cloud.sap/link/BTP_UX_Deep_Dive_Dashboard (Page 4)
- https://frontrunners.eu10.hcs.cloud.sap/link/Global_UX_Measurement_Dashboard (Page 4)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices/services/mobile-service (Page 4)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices/services/mobile-service (Page 4)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/main/tg44 (Page 4)
- https://experience.sap.com/internal-fiori-design/ (Page 4)
- https://workzone.one.int.sap/site#workzone-home&/groups/bj5ax8gAxEkFxGXcO8EIWK/workpage_tabs/CJLmZVxErNiE8hM1ApNh1G (Page 4)
- https://experience.sap.com/internal/fiori-design-web/generative-ai-design/ (Page 4)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices/ (Page 4)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/blob/latest/tg01/docs/GLOSSARY.md#central-entry-point (Page 5)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/latest/tg01 (Page 5)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/latest/tg01 (Page 5)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices/services/build-work-zone-foundation (Page 5)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices/services/build-work-zone-foundation (Page 5)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/latest/tg01#TG01.R1 (Page 5)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/latest/tg01#TG01.R2 (Page 5)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/latest/tg01#TG01.R2 (Page 5)
- https://help.sap.com/viewer/DRAFT/6388628a2fa8478598160a94f40164f7/DEV/en-US/079eb07c07c5458b8315abb3205b1837.html (Page 5)
- https://help.sap.com/viewer/DRAFT/6388628a2fa8478598160a94f40164f7/DEV/en-US/079eb07c07c5458b8315abb3205b1837.html (Page 5)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/latest/tg01#TG01.R4 (Page 5)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/latest/tg01#TG01.R4 (Page 5)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices/services/task-center-service (Page 5)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/latest/tg13 (Page 5)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/latest/tg13 (Page 5)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices/services/alert-notification-service (Page 5)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices/services/alert-notification-service (Page 5)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/main/tg03 (Page 5)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/CPA/landing-page/technology-guidelines/ (Page 6)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices (Page 6)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices (Page 6)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/atom-cfs/atom-docs/docs/about-atom/ (Page 6)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/t/CPAExtensibility/Edx57nxu5gNCuEy1G0OdAtUBcFerwwUAxHsQLk0Vk5ULhA?e=kmwPx0 (Page 6)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/t/CPAExtensibility/Edx57nxu5gNCuEy1G0OdAtUBcFerwwUAxHsQLk0Vk5ULhA?e=kmwPx0 (Page 6)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/CAP/CAP (Page 6)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/CAP/CAP (Page 6)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/A4H/RESTful+ABAP+Programming+Model (Page 6)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/A4H/RESTful+ABAP+Programming+Model (Page 6)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/hyperspace (Page 6)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/hyperspace (Page 6)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/hyperspace/academy/pavedroad/ (Page 7)
- https://portal.hyperspace.tools.sap/ (Page 7)
- https://d.dam.sap.com/s/i/a/HuUyuNr/Golden Path Guidance Paper.pdf (Page 7)
- https://help.sap.com/docs/btp/btp-developers-guide/what-is-btp-developers-guide (Page 7)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/CPA/landing-page/working-groups/clouddev/ (Page 7)
- https://www.sap.com/documents/2020/02/520ea921-847d-0010-87a3-c30de2ffd8ff.html (Page 7)
- https://www.sap.com/documents/2020/02/520ea921-847d-0010-87a3-c30de2ffd8ff.html (Page 7)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/t/CPADeveloperExperience/EQPGKiWAEXpIm94lKa_6Yo4BpJyLa39Q31xmCyP0JIp5ZQ?e=qddRiU (Page 7)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/t/CPADeveloperExperience/EQPGKiWAEXpIm94lKa_6Yo4BpJyLa39Q31xmCyP0JIp5ZQ?e=qddRiU (Page 7)
- https://go.sap.corp/oss-manifesto (Page 7)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/r/teams/CPADeveloperExperience/Shared Documents/WG Fostering Service and Code Reuse/20_Docs_and_Material/Strategy Paper/InnerSource_Strategy_(short)_v1.2.pdf (Page 7)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%5FData%5FPlatform%2FData%20Platform%20Architecture%20Overview%20%2D%202%20pager%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%5FData%5FPlatform (Page 8)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%5FData%5FPlatform%2FWG%5FDataArch%5FACD%5FData%5FPlatform%5FArchitecture%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%5FData%5FPlatform (Page 8)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%5FData%5FPlatform%2FWG%5FDataArch%5FACD%5FData%5FPlatform%5FArchitecture%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%5FData%5FPlatform (Page 8)
- https://help.sap.com/docs/hana-cloud-data-lake/welcome-guide/what-is-sap-hana-cloud-data-lake (Page 8)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/teams/CPADataManagement/_layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc=%7B407DC359-99FB-4E81-B002-B5843D2F17DD%7D&file=WG_DataArch_ADR_HANA_Cloud_As_Default_Database.docx&action=default&mobileredirect=true (Page 8)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADataManagement/DataProducts (Page 8)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%20Databricks%20%28original%29%2FWG%5FDataArch%5FADR%5FDatabricks%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%20Databricks%20%28original%29 (Page 8)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%5FData%5FPlatform%2FWG%5FDataArch%5FACD%5FData%5FPlatform%5FArchitecture%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%5FData%5FPlatform (Page 8)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%5FData%5FPlatform%2FWG%5FDataArch%5FACD%5FData%5FPlatform%5FArchitecture%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%5FData%5FPlatform (Page 8)
- https://sapedia.one.int.sap/wiki/SAP_Datasphere (Page 8)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/main/tg32 (Page 8)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADataManagement/DataProducts (Page 8)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADataManagement/DataProducts (Page 8)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/open-resource-discovery-specification/ (Page 9)
- https://sapedia.one.int.sap/wiki/Unified_Customer_Landscape (Page 9)
- https://api.sap.com/ (Page 9)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPAIntegration/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPAIntegration%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20One%20Domain%20Model%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2FPublished%20ADRs%2FWG%5FODM%5FADR%5FOID%2D2%2E0%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPAIntegration%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20One%20Domain%20Model%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2FPublished%20ADRs (Page 9)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPAIntegration/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPAIntegration%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20One%20Domain%20Model%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2FPublished%20ADRs%2FWG%5FODM%5FADR%5FOID%2D2%2E0%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPAIntegration%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20One%20Domain%20Model%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2FPublished%20ADRs (Page 9)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%20Data%20Product%2FWG%5FData%5FArchitecture%5FADR%5FODM%5Fin%5FData%20Products%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%20Data%20Product (Page 9)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%20Data%20Product%2FWG%5FData%5FArchitecture%5FADR%5FODM%5Fin%5FData%20Products%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPADataManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Data%20Architecture%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2F50%5FWorkstreams%2FWS%20Data%20Product (Page 9)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices/services/data-privacy-integration (Page 9)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kernelservices/services/data-privacy-integration (Page 9)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPASecurity/Shared Documents/WG Data Protection and Privacy/20_Docs_and_Material/Vision/WG Data Protection and Privacy - Vision 1.0.pdf?xsdata=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%3D%3D&sdata=ZDJOZUtEMjhYazlCSFZCMDJPUWE4N0tmN0FFN0FFaHN2VDRXaEZpeE9pRT0%3D&ovuser=42f7676c-f455-423c-82f6-dc2d99791af7%2Cpriyanka.porwal%40sap.com&OR=Teams-HL&CT=1690442452760&clickparams=eyJBcHBOYW1lIjoiVGVhbXMtRGVza3RvcCIsIkFwcFZlcnNpb24iOiIyOC8yMzA3MDMwNzMzMCIsIkhhc0ZlZGVyYXRlZFVzZXIiOmZhbHNlfQ%3D%3D (Page 9)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPASecurity/Shared Documents/WG Data Protection and Privacy/20_Docs_and_Material/Vision/WG Data Protection and Privacy - Vision 1.0.pdf?xsdata=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%3D%3D&sdata=ZDJOZUtEMjhYazlCSFZCMDJPUWE4N0tmN0FFN0FFaHN2VDRXaEZpeE9pRT0%3D&ovuser=42f7676c-f455-423c-82f6-dc2d99791af7%2Cpriyanka.porwal%40sap.com&OR=Teams-HL&CT=1690442452760&clickparams=eyJBcHBOYW1lIjoiVGVhbXMtRGVza3RvcCIsIkFwcFZlcnNpb24iOiIyOC8yMzA3MDMwNzMzMCIsIkhhc0ZlZGVyYXRlZFVzZXIiOmZhbHNlfQ%3D%3D (Page 9)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/Custodian/SAP+Data+Custodian (Page 9)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/Custodian/SAP+Data+Custodian (Page 9)
- https://help.sap.com/docs/sap-ai-core (Page 10)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/r/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/WG AI/20_Docs_and_Material/WS_FoundationModels/Released Documents/WG_AI_ADR_LLMAccess.pdf?csf=1&web=1&e=aeaKg3 (Page 10)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/r/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/WG AI/20_Docs_and_Material/WS_FoundationModels/Released Documents/WG_AI_ADR_LLMAccess.pdf?csf=1&web=1&e=aeaKg3 (Page 10)
- https://workzone.one.int.sap/site#workzone-home&/wiki/show/vfonCkkTHSoJk36mVEgWte (Page 10)
- https://www.sap.com/docs/download/2022/01/a8431b91-117e-0010-bca6-c68f7e60039b.pdf (Page 10)
- https://workzone.one.int.sap/site#workzone-home&/groups/byIKlmidd8ACgYb2l7KvG5/overview_page/k0Z5S64aceu7dkfnbPBwuN (Page 10)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/r/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/WG AI/40_White_Papers/PDF/Generative_AI_at_SAP_Technology_Strategy_Whitepaper_v1.0.pdf?csf=1&web=1&e=UixjWu (Page 11)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/r/teams/CPADataManagement/Shared Documents/WG AI/40_White_Papers/PDF/Generative_AI_at_SAP_Technology_Strategy_Whitepaper_v1.0.pdf?csf=1&web=1&e=UixjWu (Page 11)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/CPA/landing-page/working-groups/ai/ (Page 11)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:b:/t/CPALifecycleManagement/EUqU7qP3RcdEhJJF2cy2NBABiMSgj0z0UIf_vpgCihc1eg (Page 12)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPALifecycleManagement/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPALifecycleManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWS%20Provisioning%20Evolution%2FWG%5FTenant%20Lifecycle%5FADR%5FBlueprint%20Driven%20Provisioning%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPALifecycleManagement%2FShared%20Documents%2FWS%20Provisioning%20Evolution&p=true&ga=1 (Page 12)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/open-resource-discovery-specification/ (Page 12)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/atom-cfs/atom-docs/docs/about-atom/ (Page 12)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPAIntegration/Shared Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fteams%2FCPAIntegration%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Master%20Data%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2FPublished%2FMaster%5FData%5FVision%2Ev1%2E1%2Epdf&parent=%2Fteams%2FCPAIntegration%2FShared%20Documents%2FWG%20Master%20Data%2F20%5FDocs%5Fand%5FMaterial%2FPublished (Page 13)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/main/tg04#TG04.R5 (Page 13)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/main/tg04#TG04.R5 (Page 13)
- https://dam.sap.com/mac/app/e/pdf/preview/embed/f7jgmtt?ltr=a (Page 14)
- https://dam.sap.com/mac/app/e/pdf/preview/embed/f7jgmtt?ltr=a (Page 14)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/atom-cfs/atom-docs/docs/about-atom/ (Page 14)
- https://d.dam.sap.com/s/i/a/TTTmWs2/20230109_Working with Hyperscalers and PlusOne.pdf (Page 14)
- https://d.dam.sap.com/s/i/a/TTTmWs2/20230109_Working with Hyperscalers and PlusOne.pdf (Page 14)
- https://d.dam.sap.com/s/i/a/HgTh7xj/SAP Corporate Strategy Whitepaper January 2023.pdf (Page 14)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/ums/documentation/docs/use-cases/unified-landscape-model/ (Page 15)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/ums/documentation/docs/use-cases/unified-landscape-model/ (Page 15)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/ums/documentation/docs/ (Page 15)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/ums/documentation/docs/ (Page 15)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/atom-cfs/atom-docs/docs/about-atom/ (Page 15)
- https://d.dam.sap.com/s/i/a/HuUyuNr/Golden Path Guidance Paper.pdf (Page 15)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/kubernetes/gardener/ (Page 16)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/ironcore/docs/ (Page 16)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/teams/CPAInfrastructure/Shared Documents/WG Data Center Strategy/40_WS_Flexible_Service_Consumption/Satellite Concept/WG_DATA_CENTER_STRATEGY_AD_SATELLITE_SHORT.docx?d=w9638ccddaa554478a88ea59b0ec5f5b4&csf=1&web=1&e=t1KW6T (Page 17)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/teams/CPAInfrastructure/Shared Documents/WG Data Center Strategy/40_WS_Flexible_Service_Consumption/Satellite Concept/WG_DATA_CENTER_STRATEGY_AD_SATELLITE_SHORT.docx?d=w9638ccddaa554478a88ea59b0ec5f5b4&csf=1&web=1&e=t1KW6T (Page 17)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/sites/206221 (Page 17)
- https://d.dam.sap.com/s/i/a/TTTmWs2/20230109_Working with Hyperscalers and PlusOne.pdfF (Page 17)
- https://d.dam.sap.com/s/i/a/TTTmWs2/20230109_Working with Hyperscalers and PlusOne.pdfF (Page 17)
- https://www.sap.com/about/trust-center/certification-compliance/compliance-finder.html?tag=compliance-offering:offering-name/sap-business-technology-platform (Page 17)
- https://www.sap.com/about/trust-center/certification-compliance/compliance-finder.html?tag=compliance-offering:offering-name/sap-business-technology-platform (Page 17)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/sites/206806/Shared%20Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?id=%2Fsites%2F206806%2FShared%20Documents%2F04%5FMCAP%20Reports%5FLight%20Version%2FMCAP%20Update%20%2D%20Sep%202023%2Epdf&parent=%2Fsites%2F206806%2FShared%20Documents%2F04%5FMCAP%20Reports%5FLight%20Version0 (Page 17)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/teams/CPAInfrastructure/Shared Documents/WG Data Center Strategy/40_WS_Flexible_Service_Consumption/Satellite Concept/WG_DATA_CENTER_STRATEGY_AD_SATELLITE_SHORT.docx?d=w9638ccddaa554478a88ea59b0ec5f5b4&csf=1&web=1&e=t1KW6T (Page 17)
- https://workzone.one.int.sap/site#workzone-home&/groups/fbeU0dnBMVm6nVFMoh1KLT/overview_page/uNKq2hj3SqxNlHt45y6l8f (Page 18)
- https://workzone.one.int.sap/site#workzone-home&/groups/fbeU0dnBMVm6nVFMoh1KLT/overview_page/uNKq2hj3SqxNlHt45y6l8f (Page 18)
- https://workzone.one.int.sap/site#workzone-viewAll?sap-app-origin-hint=&/groups/sYpLgMV0OU1mdxdzGTlHwy/documents/uMNTPkKaDLo4nJQP9pAeH8/slide_viewer (Page 18)
- https://workzone.one.int.sap/site#workzone-viewAll?sap-app-origin-hint=&/groups/sYpLgMV0OU1mdxdzGTlHwy/documents/uMNTPkKaDLo4nJQP9pAeH8/slide_viewer (Page 18)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/main/tg02#TG02.R1 (Page 19)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/main/tg02#TG02.R5 (Page 19)
- https://services.tools.sap/#/perspective/services/!service/SERVICE-1024 (Page 19)
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_for_Cross-domain_Identity_Management (Page 19)
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_for_Cross-domain_Identity_Management (Page 19)
- https://github.tools.sap/CentralEngineering/TechnologyGuidelines/tree/main/tg16 (Page 19)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/sites/124120/SitePages/Service-Provider-Cockpit.aspx (Page 21)
- https://uptime.is/99.99 (Page 21)
- https://uptime.is/99.99 (Page 21)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/teams/CPADeveloperExperience/Shared Documents/WG Cloud Development/20_Docs_and_Material/Cost_Optimization/Optimizing_Cost_for_Cloud_Development_and_Operations_v1.0.pdf (Page 21)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/teams/CPALifecycleManagement/Shared Documents/WG Logging and Monitoring/20_Docs_and_Material/Work Packages/WP-003 Common Telemetry Attributes, Their Semantics and Structure/WG_Logging and Monitoring_SAR_ Common Telemetry Attributes, Their Semantics and Structure.docx?d=wf57edc5665a146a898fd845ce30f3466&csf=1&web=1&e=fLPCU8 (Page 21)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/teams/CPALifecycleManagement/Shared Documents/WG Logging and Monitoring/20_Docs_and_Material/Work Packages/WP-002 Common Metrics Format(s) and Protocols/WG_Logging and Monitoring_ADR_Common Metrics Formats and Protocols.docx?d=w5bf134c3678a4fe7a6f100d4ac5b159d&csf=1&web=1&e=zSqHql (Page 21)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/teams/CPALifecycleManagement/Shared Documents/WG Logging and Monitoring/20_Docs_and_Material/Work Packages/WP-001 Common Trace Correlation, Data Formats and Protocols/WG_Logging and Monitoring_ADR_Common Trace Correlation, Data Formats and Protocols.docx?d=w028499f1d79449b8bf045e1a15e6801b&csf=1&web=1&e=il4hrU (Page 21)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/teams/CPALifecycleManagement/Shared Documents/WG Logging and Monitoring/20_Docs_and_Material/Work Packages/WP-004 Common Log Formats and Protocols/WG_Logging and Monitoring_ADR_Common Log Formats and Protocols.docx?d=wff515de4eaf647a28e416a0bd851ab6f&csf=1&web=1&e=CDZ8gG (Page 21)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/teams/CPALifecycleManagement/_layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc=%7B3C5F9C25-8F00-4451-9F05-E535CF193BD3%7D&file=Logging%20and%20Monitoring%20Motivation%20and%20Vision.docx&action=default&mobileredirect=true (Page 21)
- https://sap.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/teams/CPALifecycleManagement/_layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc=%7B3C5F9C25-8F00-4451-9F05-E535CF193BD3%7D&file=Logging%20and%20Monitoring%20Motivation%20and%20Vision.docx&action=default&mobileredirect=true (Page 21)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/SIEM/SIEM+Service+Catalogue (Page 22)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/SIEM/SIEM+Service+Catalogue (Page 22)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/x/7vE3q (Page 22)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/x/7vE3q (Page 22)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/PSSEC/SEC-215 (Page 22)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=3774945702 (Page 22)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=3774945702 (Page 22)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/PSSEC/SEC-309 (Page 22)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/display/PSSEC/SEC-309 (Page 22)
- https://ocm.software/ (Page 22)
- https://ocm.software/ (Page 22)
- https://wiki.one.int.sap/wiki/pages/viewpage.action?spaceKey=PSSEC&title=SDOL-017 (Page 22)
- https://d.dam.sap.com/s/i/a/HgTh7xj/SAP Corporate Strategy Whitepaper January 2023.pdf (Page 23)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/CPA/landing-page/participation-and-processes/participating-in-cpa/ (Page 23)
- https://pages.github.tools.sap/CPA/landing-page/participation-and-processes/participating-in-cpa/ (Page 23)
